# Impacts on Society

The AP Computer Science Principles course is the first computer science class that I am planning to implement at the Academy of Careers and Exploration High School. We are within a fringe, rural setting with 340 students. The prerequisite to this course will be Algebra 1; thus opening up the course to students primarily in 10th to 12th grade, although there are quite a few 9th graders who are enrolled in Geometry, making them also eligible for the class. 

In order to entice students to explore computer science, our school is considering offering it as a third year math credit. This opens an alternative option to Algebra II and Personal Finance, the only choices available to students who need a third year math credit. According to an unofficial poll conducted by senior students in the Speech and Debate club this year, there is a growing interest in computer science among the underclassmen. In fact, because of this interest, I learned that the AP Computer Science Principles course was added to the list of choices for electives for the next school year. I recently spoke with the counselors and they expressed that the interest in the course is comparable to that of the Introduction to Robotics class. Currently, the only option to learn any programming is through the Introduction to Robotics class. Therefore, adding another computer science class would be a positive response to the growing interest from the student body. We are a small school, therefore depending on staffing demands, it is too early to confirm if the class will in fact be offered. However, this positive response is promising. 

As far as technology is concerned, in the last staff meeting, the Principal mentioned that all Chromebook carts (there is one in every class to meet a 1:1 student to Chromebook ratio in the classroom) will be outfitted with new units for the incoming school year. The units collected from the carts will then be distributed to make sure every student who needs one will be equipped with one. The District still has the same capability to help out with wifi-connectivity and subsidies for internet service for families that may need them. With such infrastructure in place, coupled with a very strong IT Department in our District, implementing the AP Computer Science Principles course will not be hindered by lack of access to technology, internet service, nor wifi connectivity.

For the AP Computer Science Principles course, no background in programming is required, so it is an available choice open to all the students. Our school currently has a 61% minority enrollment, with 53% percent economically disadvantaged students. Offering this class openly to students will allow them to explore and learn what computer science is really about, and potentially open more doors to career opportunities they would not have previously considered. Furthermore, this will also serve to welcome students to enroll in an AP-level Course, especially for those who would have never thought about enrolling in an AP course, or those who do not normally pursue advanced academic courses to reach eligibility for AP levels. 

Special Education students at our school are routinely placed in mainstream classes for electives and even core subjects such as Science, History, and Government. In the past, Special Education students have taken the Introduction to Robotics class, successfully learning and acquiring competent computing and programming skills. Teachers routinely work with the Special Education teacher and aides to support students and uphold specific accommodations dictated by Individualized Education Plans (IEP). Their success in the Introduction to Robotics class promises a similar, positive outcome in the AP Computer Science Principles course that is designed to be open to all students.

The curriculum of the AP Computer Science Principles course will follow that designed through CodeHS.org. Embedded in the prepared curriculum are overarching goals that focus on investigating the impact of computing on society, economy, and culture; learning to become informed, responsible users of technology; and establishing “ an inclusive, safe, collaborative, and ethical computing culture.” These overarching goals are addressed through various activities spread out in the curriculum, focusing primarily on the following units of study: Unit Three “Programming with JavaScript”; Unit 11 “The Internet”; Unit 12 Practice Performance Task  “The Effects of the Internet”; and Unit 15 Project “The Impacts of Computing.”


## Plan

### Learning Objectives

The learning objectives for the class that relate to social impacts will focus on incorporating Practice P6 and Big Idea 5 from the College Board AP Computer Science Principles Framework. Assignments that relate to social impacts are found in four different units in the AP Computer Science Principles course. 

Learning Objectives for Unit Three: Programming with JavaScript
- Knowledge: to learn what programing is; to learn the terminology associated with writing programing language
- Comprehension: to demonstrate and apply the proper format and syntax associated with writing code
- Application and Synthesis: to write a code that addresses a specific task, explain why programming is an important skill how it can be useful
- Analysis: to survey and explain the various ways that programs are being used in today\
- Evaluation: to discuss and compare the positive and negative effects of programs

Learning Objectives for Unit Eleven: The Internet
- Knowledge: to describe what and how the Internet works; to define what the digital divide is; to define cybersecurity
- Comprehension: to explain through specific examples of how the Internet impacts their lives; to survey their peers and community with regards to accessibility to technology and the Internet; 
- Application and Synthesis: to discuss if the digital divide is a current issue that impacts their peers or immediate community; 
- Analysis and Evaluation: to analyze and discuss the implications of that specific computing innovation on data privacy, security, or storage concerns

Learning Objectives for Unit Twelve: The Effects of the Internet and Unit Fifteen Project: Impact of Computing
- Knowledge: to define “computing innovation”
- Comprehension: to identify specific, concrete examples of computing innovations used in the world today that have an impact on society, economy, or culture
- Application and Synthesis: to research and communicate beneficial and harmful effects of a specific internet-based computing innovation; to develop a computational artifact (graphic, animation, video, program, or audio recording) for classmates to learn about their Internet-based computing innovation of choice
- Analysis and Evaluation: to analyze and discuss the implications of that specific computing innovation on data privacy, security, or storage concerns; to discuss and evaluate the ethical implications of that internet-based computing innovation


### Learning Activities and Outcomes

The learning activities in each unit will be diverse. Typically each unit will start with an introductory video that introduces the big idea concept. The video will be followed by a short assessment quiz. In order to explore the concept further, students may be tasked to research specific topics, or be presented with case studies to read, discuss, and answer questions about; or assigned a programming assignment that applies the concept that is being discussed. These tasks are designed to apply the concepts learned while fostering the students’ creative, innovative, and analytical mind. Every unit will involve open discussion within student groups or as a whole class; or group presentations. The class will have the opportunity to critique or discuss various aspects of the project, especially as it relates to negative and/or positive impacts on society.. All student work will be compiled into a portfolio.

Specific sample learning activities for the described units are presented. The resulting outcomes as they relate to impacts on society and inclusivity are also discussed.

Learning activities and Outcomes for Unit Three: Programming with JavaScript:

- In this unit, students are presented with a couple videos: “Uses of Programs” and a TED Talk entitled “Why Should You Learn to Program?”. This is followed by a written free response reflection activity entitled “Programs in Your Life.”  This unit serves to first introduce the concept of programming by creating real-life connections to what students currently use and experience. This emphasizes the relevance of programs at a personal level and fosters the students’ probable interest to learn more about the subject. Once students recognize how pertinent programming is to their daily lives, we can further explore the positive and negative impacts of programming. Discussion can further lead to investigating, for example, the algorithms behind programming involved in social media and its connection to “electronic device’ addiction. An open discussion question such as “Are you purposely being manipulated to develop an electronic device addiction?” could spark interesting discussions. This really opens up the dialogue and hopefully entices students’ increased interest and awareness. There are a plethora of issues that can be discussed, but the common thread is that it will be relevant to all students. Students will recognize that regardless of their background or experience, they have a personal stake because they are not immune from these influences. If these topics successfully whet the students’ appetite to learn more, the more prone they will be to participating in the discussions as they will be able to relate to other students’ ideas and experiences. It creates a learning environment that promotes the intrinsic engagement of all students in the class.

Learning activities and Outcomes for Unit Eleven: The Internet

- In this unit, students are presented with a couple videos about the Internet: “Welcome to the Internet” and “The Impact of the Internet.” This is followed by short assessment quizzes to check for understanding “Welcome to the Internet Quiz” and “The Impact of the Internet Quiz.” There is also a written free response reflection question “The Internet and You.” These activities will explain how the internet works and allow students to explore how the Internet impacts their lives. Again, it gives an opportunity for students to share and discuss personal experiences and habits. Discussions could lead to social media applications and their positive and negative impacts. “Pokemon Go” , a popular game (or app) is a concrete example that is examined in this unit. Students engage in a discussion regarding the unintended effects of “Pokemon Go.” There are many anecdotal examples of positive and negative effects of this game. On average students spend 4-6 hours on the Internet everyday; the majority of that time is spent on non-academic activities. Interesting discussions arising from Internet use, and/or positive or negative impacts of the Internet on their own selves will hopefully entice their interest to explore and delve deeper into the subject. It engages students to critically think about the personal ramifications of the Internet that they may have not considered previously. These discussions are pertinent to all students and it will motivate all to participate and learn more about the subject. These discussions will hopefully entice all students in the class to actively participate by sharing their personal views.

- Furthermore, this unit introduces the idea of the “Digital Divide.” Students may or may not be aware of the existence of the “Digital Divide.” Students have the opportunity to survey their own community and peer groups, creating awareness regarding the “Digital Divide.” Meaningful discussions can arise when addressing ways to close the digital gap. Students will have the opportunity to reflect on their personal situation and offer their creative solutions to the issue. Again, the relevant nature of the subject of discussion will motivate all students to engage.

- This unit also explores data privacy and cybersecurity. There are written reflection questions that look into personal data in the assignment entitled “You can be tracked.” Discussion points can lead to examining the pros and cons of anonymity. Exploratory topics include hacking, cybercrime, and countermeasures to ensure cybersecurity. This may even entice student interest in pursuing the branch of cybersecurity in computer science. This opens the door for opportunities that students may have not previously entertained. Based on the surveys mentioned earlier, much of the current interest in computer science relates to game programming and design. An alternative field of cybersecurity may be a novel concept to pursue further, especially since the demand for this specialty will only increase in the future. 

- Further discussion points that can be introduced are the legal and ethical ramifications of Internet censorship. Cross-curricular history/government class-related discussions with First Amendment rights opens up the floor for interesting insights from students. This consistently addresses issues that are pertinent to all students involved, thereby creating an engaging learning environment.

Learning activities and Outcomes for Unit Twelve: The Effects of the Internet and Unit Fifteen Project: Impact of Computing

- This unit is an extension of the concepts discussed in Unit Eleven. It focuses on specific computing innovations and positive and negative impacts on society, economy, and culture. In this unit, students are tasked to pick and research one specific, Internet-based computing innovation. The final product that the student must produce is a computational artifact (graphic, animation, video, program, or audio recording) to be presented to the class. Their research should look into the positive and negative impacts of the chosen Internet-based computing innovation, as well as its ethical implications. Furthermore, discussion of data collection, implications of privacy issues, security issues, and data storage concerns should be addressed in the presentation. Students could be asked to ponder if the original intention of a specific Internet-based computing innovation was positive, but developed into a negative impact.application. Or, similarly, students can be asked to contemplate how the algorithm could be modified to minimize negative effects of the chosen Internet-based computing innovation. 

- This performance-based task motivates the student to critically analyze the implications of their chosen Internet-based computing innovation. It hopefully will persuade them to have a more critical mindset when using such applications on a daily basis. It may even spark them to engage with such discussions with their peers, extending awareness to others. 

### Assessment

Throughout the course, students will be collecting artifacts for their portfolio as they complete each unit. The learning activities weigh heavily on students actively participating to show that they are meeting the learning objectives. There are a few check for understanding quizzes to make sure students have a grasp on basic terminology and definitions. Students are given ample opportunities to reflect on their learning by answering questions. These artifacts give insight to what the student is thinking regarding the various topics. Furthermore, student learning activities involve ample discussion. Active participation in discussion not only assesses knowledge of the subject matter, but also reveals how the students have reflected upon that knowledge. Performance-task projects culminating with a presentation using a multi-media approach also provides evidence of a student's well-rounded understanding of the topics presented in the various units.



### References
https://codehs.com/uploads/a70230b5fd0ee0ffb5481386f1a84ee1  
https://codehs.com/course/6166/explore

